README.md, before:

# database_setup

### Install Homebrew if not already
```
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

## Directory Structure
- Sample data:
```
FAIRtrain-schema/
├── data/           # CSV files
├── dictionary/     # JSON metadata files
├── schema.json     # Shared schema definition
```

---

### Create .env file
Create a `.env` file with the following content:
```env
DB_USER=mac_username
DB_NAME=fairtrain
MONGO_DB=fairtrain
MONGO_URI=mongodb_connection_string   # i.e. for local connection, set it as: mongodb://localhost:27017/ 
DATA_PATH=path_to_data_files_csv_files
DICT_PATH=path_to_dictionary_files_json_files
```


## PostgreSQL Setup - Mac via homebrew

### 1. Install PostgreSQL (macOS)
```bash
brew install postgresql
brew services start postgresql
```

### 2. Create the database
```bash
createdb -U $(whoami) fairtrain 
```
- fairtrain is the name of the database

### 4. Run the PostgreSQL setup script
```bash
bash setup_postgres.sh
chmod +x setup_postgres.sh
./setup_postgres.sh
```

- This script:
  - Creates a `samples` table using `schema.json`
  - Loops through all CSVs in `$DATA_PATH` and imports them into the table

- To verify the data was correctly inserted:
```
psql -U $(whoami) -d fairtrain
SELECT * FROM samples LIMIT 5;
SELECT * FROM force_data LIMIT 5;
```
This shows the top 5 records

### 5. View in pgAdmin (optional)
Install pgAdmin via website: https://www.pgadmin.org/download/pgadmin-4-macos/

- Open pgAdmin
- Click add New server on the dashboard
- Add a name for the server in the name box in general tab
- Go to connection tab
    - hostname / address: `localhost`
    - port: 5432
    - maintance database: `postgres`
    - username: your_mac_username 
- Go to Object Explorer tab on the left side
- Click on server that you created (the one that was named)
- Click on `schemas`, then `tables`, then `samples`
- Right-click samples tab on the object explorer tab
    - Click on View/Edit Data then click on All Rows
    - Click on the Data Output tab at the bottom of the page if not already opened


## MongoDB Setup - Mac via homebrew

### 1. Install MongoDB
```bash
brew tap mongodb/brew
brew install mongodb-community
brew services start mongodb/brew/mongodb-community
```

### 2. Run the MongoDB setup script
```bash
bash setup_mongo.sh
chmod +x setup_mongo.sh
./setup_mongo.sh
```

- This script:
  - Creates a validated `samples` collection using `schema.json`
  - Imports all CSVs from `$DATA_PATH` into individual collections
  - Imports all JSONs from `$DICT_PATH` into a shared `dictionaries` collection

### 3. Verify in `mongosh`
```bash
mongosh
use fairtrain
db.getCollectionNames()
db.<collectionName>.findOne()
```
This shows the one of the records stored in the collection on mongobd

### 4. View on mongo compass (optional)
Install MongoDB Compass from website: https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/compass

- Open mongodb compass
- Go to connections tab on the left-hand side
- Hover over your connection or `localhost:27017` if you have a local connection until CONNECT button appears, then click on it
- Click on the database that you created, in this example, it would be fairtrain

## 🗃️ Data Export Scripts

### Exporting Data from PostgreSQL

Use the following scripts to export scalar and tabular data from PostgreSQL into `.csv` or `.json` formats.

#### Script: `export_postgres.sh`

```bash
bash export_postgres.sh
chmod +x export_postgres.sh
./export_postgres.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select export format: `csv`, `json`, or `both`.
- Exports data from:
  - `samples` table
  - `force_data` table
- Exports go to:
  - `exported_postgres/csv/`
  - `exported_postgres/json/`

#### Script: `export_query_postgres.sh`

```bash
bash export_query_postgres.sh
chmod +x export_query_postgres.sh
./export_query_postgres.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select a query type:
  1. Record with a given sampleId
  2. All records with `groupA` in sampleId
  3. Record with max UTS
  4. Top 5 records with highest UTS
  5. Top 5 records with `groupA` in sampleId and highest UTS
- Exports result to `exported_query/postgres/` as `.csv`

---

### Exporting Data from MongoDB

Use the following scripts to export scalar and nested JSON data from MongoDB collections.

#### Script: `export_mongo.sh`

```bash
bash export_mongo.sh
chmod +x export_mongo.sh
./export_mongo.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select export format: `csv`, `json`, or `both`
- Exports:
  - Scalar data fields: `sample_id, width, thickness, length` to CSV
  - Full nested documents including array `data` field to JSON
- Output paths:
  - `exported_mongo/csv/`
  - `exported_mongo/json/`

#### Script: `export_query_mongo.sh`

```bash
bash export_query_mongo.sh
chmod +x export_query_mongo.sh
./export_query_mongo.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select a query type:
  1. Record with a given sampleId
  2. All records with `groupA` in sampleId
  3. Record with max UTS
  4. Top 5 records with highest UTS
  5. Top 5 records with `groupA` in sampleId and highest UTS
- Exports result to `exported_query/mongo/` as `.csv`

## Trouble Shooting
If there is an issue with bash where it states ```Permission denied```, make sure to run the ```chmod +x <bash_file_name>``` first before the ```./<bash_file_name>```

Commit message:

updated readme to include instructions for json_postgre.sh

README.md, after:

# database_setup

### Install Homebrew if not already
```
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

## Directory Structure
- Sample data:
```
FAIRtrain-schema/
├── data/           # CSV files
├── dictionary/     # JSON metadata files
├── schema.json     # Shared schema definition
```

---

### Create .env file
Create a `.env` file with the following content:
```env
DB_USER=mac_username
DB_NAME=fairtrain
MONGO_DB=fairtrain
MONGO_URI=mongodb_connection_string   # i.e. for local connection, set it as: mongodb://localhost:27017/ 
DATA_PATH=path_to_data_files_csv_files
DICT_PATH=path_to_dictionary_files_json_files
```


## PostgreSQL Setup - Mac via homebrew

### 1. Install PostgreSQL (macOS)
```bash
brew install postgresql
brew services start postgresql
```

### 2. Create the database
```bash
createdb -U $(whoami) fairtrain 
```
- fairtrain is the name of the database

### 4. Run the PostgreSQL setup script
```bash
bash setup_postgres.sh
chmod +x setup_postgres.sh
./setup_postgres.sh
```

- This script:
  - Creates a `samples` table using `schema.json`
  - Loops through all CSVs in `$DATA_PATH` and imports them into the table

- To verify the data was correctly inserted:
```
psql -U $(whoami) -d fairtrain
SELECT * FROM samples LIMIT 5;
SELECT * FROM force_data LIMIT 5;
```
This shows the top 5 records

### 5. View in pgAdmin (optional)
Install pgAdmin via website: https://www.pgadmin.org/download/pgadmin-4-macos/

- Open pgAdmin
- Click add New server on the dashboard
- Add a name for the server in the name box in general tab
- Go to connection tab
    - hostname / address: `localhost`
    - port: 5432
    - maintance database: `postgres`
    - username: your_mac_username 
- Go to Object Explorer tab on the left side
- Click on server that you created (the one that was named)
- Click on `schemas`, then `tables`, then `samples` (i.e. your table names)
    - make sure your tables are up to date, right-click tables and click refresh to make sure that they are
- Right-click samples (your table that you would like to view) tab on the object explorer tab
    - Click on View/Edit Data then click on All Rows
    - Click on the Data Output tab at the bottom of the page if not already opened


## MongoDB Setup - Mac via homebrew

### 1. Install MongoDB
```bash
brew tap mongodb/brew
brew install mongodb-community
brew services start mongodb/brew/mongodb-community
```

### 2. Run the MongoDB setup script
```bash
bash setup_mongo.sh
chmod +x setup_mongo.sh
./setup_mongo.sh
```

- This script:
  - Creates a validated `samples` collection using `schema.json`
  - Imports all CSVs from `$DATA_PATH` into individual collections
  - Imports all JSONs from `$DICT_PATH` into a shared `dictionaries` collection

### 3. Verify in `mongosh`
```bash
mongosh
use fairtrain
db.getCollectionNames()
db.<collectionName>.findOne()
```
This shows the one of the records stored in the collection on mongobd

### 4. View on mongo compass (optional)
Install MongoDB Compass from website: https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/compass

- Open mongodb compass
- Go to connections tab on the left-hand side
- Hover over your connection or `localhost:27017` if you have a local connection until CONNECT button appears, then click on it
- Click on the database that you created, in this example, it would be fairtrain

## Data Export Scripts

### Exporting Data from PostgreSQL

Use the following scripts to export scalar and tabular data from PostgreSQL into `.csv` or `.json` formats.

#### Script: `export_postgres.sh`

```bash
bash export_postgres.sh
chmod +x export_postgres.sh
./export_postgres.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select export format: `csv`, `json`, or `both`.
- Exports data from:
  - `samples` table
  - `force_data` table
- Exports go to:
  - `exported_postgres/csv/`
  - `exported_postgres/json/`

#### Script: `export_query_postgres.sh`

```bash
bash export_query_postgres.sh
chmod +x export_query_postgres.sh
./export_query_postgres.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select a query type:
  1. Record with a given sampleId
  2. All records with `groupA` in sampleId
  3. Record with max UTS
  4. Top 5 records with highest UTS
  5. Top 5 records with `groupA` in sampleId and highest UTS
- Exports result to `exported_query/postgres/` as `.csv`

---

### Exporting Data from MongoDB

Use the following scripts to export scalar and nested JSON data from MongoDB collections.

#### Script: `export_mongo.sh`

```bash
bash export_mongo.sh
chmod +x export_mongo.sh
./export_mongo.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select export format: `csv`, `json`, or `both`
- Exports:
  - Scalar data fields: `sample_id, width, thickness, length` to CSV
  - Full nested documents including array `data` field to JSON
- Output paths:
  - `exported_mongo/csv/`
  - `exported_mongo/json/`

#### Script: `export_query_mongo.sh`

```bash
bash export_query_mongo.sh
chmod +x export_query_mongo.sh
./export_query_mongo.sh
```

- Prompts the user to select a query type:
  1. Record with a given sampleId
  2. All records with `groupA` in sampleId
  3. Record with max UTS
  4. Top 5 records with highest UTS
  5. Top 5 records with `groupA` in sampleId and highest UTS
- Exports result to `exported_query/mongo/` as `.csv`

## Uploading to PostgreSQL via JSON Files
```bash
bash json_postgre.sh
chmod +x json_postgre.sh
./json_postgre.sh
```
- This script will take a while (more than just a couple of minutes)
    - Recommend viewing this on pgAdmin, instructions provided above

## Trouble Shooting
If there is an issue with bash where it states ```Permission denied```, make sure to run the ```chmod +x <bash_file_name>``` first before the ```./<bash_file_name>```
